<!--
  © 2021-2022 Intel Corporation
  SPDX-License-Identifier: MPL-2.0
-->
Most standard functionality in Device Modeling Language (DML) is implemented in
templates. Built-in
templates can be categorized as follows:

* Each object type has a corresponding template which is instantiated for all
  objects of that type. For instance, the template `register` is automatically
  instantiated in all registers. All such templates inherit the `object`
  template, and define the `objtype` parameter to the name of the object type,
  e.g. `"register"` for registers.


* Some templates primarily provide a standard implementation of some
  behaviour. For instance, the `uint64_attr` template can be
  applied on `attribute` objects to make it a simple integer
  attribute.

* Some templates primarily specify a programming interface, typically by
  providing an abstract or overrideable method or parameter. Such templates
  are often named like the provided member. For instance, objects
  that implement the `init` template provide the abstract method
  `init`. Interface templates have a number of uses:
  * In some cases, an interface template extends an existing
    template, altering its default behaviour to make sure its
    interface method is called. Often, this means that when you
    provide an implementation of an interface method,
    you *must* instantiate the corresponding template;
    otherwise, the method will not be called. For instance, if you
    implement the `write` method in a register, it is not called
      by default upon a write access; however, if you instantiate
      the `write` template in the register, then the register's
      behaviour is altered to call the
      `write` method. Thus, in order to provide custom
      side-effects on a write, you must write something like:
    ```
    register r @ 0 is write { method write(uint64 value) { default();
    log info: "wrote r"; } }
    ```


  * When writing a method or parameter override
    *inside a template*, you must
    explicitly instantiate the template you are overriding in order to specify
    that your declaration takes precedence over the default implementation. If
    your template is intended for a specific object type, then it is sufficient
    to override that template, but it is often better to override a more
    specific template if possible. For instance, the `init_val`
    parameter belongs to the `init_val` template, which is
    inherited by all registers. So a template that overrides this parameter
    may be implemented as follows:

    ```
    template init_to_ten is register {
        param init_val = 10;
    }
    ```

    However, it is even better to only inherit the `init_val`
    template:

    ```
    template init_to_ten is init_val {
        param init_val = 10;
    }
    ```

    The latter improves efficiency and
    permits `init_to_ten` to also be used on fields.


  * Similarly, if you write a template that needs to *access* some
    member of the object, then it must inherit a template that provides that
    member. For instance:
    ```
    template log_on_change is (write, get, name) {
        method write(uint64 value) {
            if (this.get() != value) {
                log info: "%s changed!", this.name;
            }
            default();
        }
    }
    ```


    Again, it would also work to inherit `register` instead of
    `get` and `name`, but at the cost of reduced
    flexibility and efficiency.


## Universal templates
The following templates are applicable to all object kinds:

### name

Provides a string parameter `name`, containing the name of the
object, as exposed to the end-user. This parameter is typically used in log
messages and names of configuration attributes. The name can be overridden
in order to hide confidential information from the end-user.



### desc

Provides a string parameter `desc`, with a short description in plain text. By
convention, this should preferably be a few descriptive words, but may also be
a long name. The description can appear during simulation, when inspecting the
device, and also serves as a docstring that enriches the DML source code. The
parameter's default value is `undefined`. The `desc` parameter has a short-hand
syntax described in section [Object
Declarations](3.-Device-Modeling-Language,-version-1.4#object-declarations).

Also provides a string parameter `shown_desc`, which is the string
actually exposed to the end-user during simulation. This parameter defaults to
`desc`, and can be overridden in order to hide confidential information
from the end-user.

See also [template
`documentation`](#documentation).

### shown\_desc

A subtemplate of [`desc`](#desc) that makes the `shown_desc` parameter a typed
parameter. This is inherited by objects that need to access `shown_desc` from
the context of a shared method.


### documentation

Provides a string parameter `documentation`, with a longer
description. The documentation may appear when extracting documentation from
the device.

If you have the *Documentation and Packaging* package and intend to
generate Simics reference documentation for the device then the
`documentation` string must follow the Simics documentation XML format,
otherwise you will get a syntax error during the documentation build. See the
*Writing Documentation* application note.

Also provides a string parameter `shown_documentation`, defaulting to
`documentation`. This parameter is similar to `shown_desc` in the [desc](#desc)
template, and is mainly a convenient way to suppress documentation.


### limitations

Provides a string parameter `limitations`, describing limitations in
the implementation of this object. The documentation may appear when extracting
documentation from the device.

If you have the *Documentation and Packaging* package and intend to
generate Simics reference documentation for the device then the
`limitations` string must follow the Simics documentation XML format,
otherwise you will get a syntax error during the documentation build. See the
*Writing Documentation* application note.

Also provides a string parameter `shown_limitations`, defaulting to
`limitations`. This parameter is similar to `shown_desc`, and
is mainly a convenient way to suppress documentation.

### init

Provides an abstract method `init`, which is called when the
device is created, *before* any attributes have been
initialized. Typically used to initialize a default value, or to set up data
structures.

The method `init` is automatically called on all objects that implement the `init` template.

### post\_init

Provides an abstract method `post_init`, which is called when the
device is created, *after* any attributes have been
initialized. Typically used to establish connections to other devices, or to
set up data structures that depend on configured attribute values.

The method `post_init` is automatically called on all objects that
implement the `post_init` template.

### object

Base template, implemented by all objects. Inherits the templates
[`name`](#name), [`desc`](#desc), [`documentation`](#documentation) and
[`limitations`](#limitations). Provides the following additional parameters,
which cannot be overridden:

* `this` (reference): Always refers to the current object, i.e., the
  nearest enclosing object definition.

* `objtype`: string constant describing the object type, e.g. `"register"`

* `parent` (reference or `undefined`): Always refers to the parent
  (containing) object. Has the value `undefined` in the `device` object.

* qname: The fully qualified name, including indices, such as
  `some_bank.r0`. Constructed from the `name` parameter.  In the
  device object, this is equal to the `name` parameter.

* dev: The top-level `device` object

* indices: List of local indices for this object. For a non-array
  object, this is the empty list. In a register array of size N, it is
  a list with one element, a non-negative integer smaller than N. The
  parameter is *not* cumulative across the object hierarchy, so for a
  single field inside a register array, the value is the empty list.

* Each array has an *individual index parameter*, to make it possible
  to refer to both inner and outer indexes when arrays are nested
  (cf. the `indices` parameter, above). The parameter name is
  specified in the array declaration; for instance, the declaration
  `register regs[i < 4][j < 11];` defines two index parameters, `i` and `j`.
  In this case, the `indices` parameter is `[i, j]`.

The `object` template provides the non-overridable method `cancel_after()`,
which cancels all pending events posted using `after` which are associated with
the object (any events associated with subobjects are unaffected).

There are no other methods common for all objects, but the methods `init`
and `post_init` are automatically called on all objects that implement
the [`init`](#init) and [`post_init`](#post_init) template, respectively.


## Device objects

The top-level scope of a DML file defines the *device object*, defined by the
template `device`. This template inherits the [`init`](#init) and
[`post_init`](#post_init) templates.

The `device` template contains the following methods:

* `init()`: Called when the device object is loaded, but before its
  configuration-object attributes have been initialized.

* `post_init()`: Called when the device object is loaded, *after* its
  configuration-object attributes have been initialized.

* `destroy()`: Called when the device object is being deleted.

The `device` template contains the following parameters:

* `classname` *[string]*: The name of the Simics configuration object class defined
  by the device model. Defaults to the name of the device object.

* `register_size` *[integer | undefined]*: The default size (width) in bytes
  used for `register` objects; inherited by `bank` objects. The default value
  is `undefined`.

* `byte_order` *[string]*: The default byte order used when accessing registers
  wider than a single byte; inherited by `bank` objects. Allowed values are
  `"little-endian"` and `"big-endian"`. The default value is `"little-endian"`.

* `be_bitorder` *[bool]*: The default value of the `be_bitorder` in banks.  The
  default value is `true` if the DML file containing the `device` statement
  declares `bitorder be;`, and `false` otherwise.

* `use_io_memory` *[bool]*: The default value of the `use_io_memory` parameter
  in banks. The current default value is `true`, but in future Simics versions
  it will be `false`.

* `obj` *[conf_object_t *]*: A pointer to the `conf_object_t` C struct
  that Simics associates with this device instance

* `simics_api_version` *[string]*: The Simics API version used when building
  this device, as specified by the `--simics-api` command-line argument;
  e.g. `"6"` for the Simics 6 API.


## Group objects

Group objects are generic container objects, used to group other objects.
They can appear anywhere in the object hierarchy, but some object types
(currently `implement` and `interface`) may not have a group
as parent.

The `group` template contains no particular methods or parameters other
than what is inherited from the [`object`](#object) template.

In a group hierarchy directly below a `port` or `device` object, none of the
group object may be named `bank` or `port`; this is to avoid name clashes.

## Attribute objects

The `attribute` template contains the following methods:

<dl><dt>

<small>get() -&gt; (attr\_value\_t value)</small>
</dt><dd>

Abstract method. Returns the value of the attribute.
</dd><dt>

<small>set(attr\_value\_t value) throws</small>
</dt><dd>

Abstract method. Sets the value of the attribute. If the provided value is
not allowed, use a `throw` statement to signal the error.
</dd><dt>

<small>get\_attribute -&gt; (attr\_value\_t value), set\_attribute(attr\_value\_t value) -&gt; (set\_error\_t err)</small>
</dt><dd>

Not intended to be used directly. Called by Simics for reading and
writing the attribute value. Calls the `get`
and `set` methods.
</dd></dl>

The `attribute` template contains the following parameters:

<dl><dt>

type [string | undefined]
</dt><dd>

A Simics configuration-object attribute type description string,
such as `"i"` or `"[s*]"`, specifying the type of the
attribute. (See the documentation of
`SIM_register_typed_attribute` in the *Model Builder
Reference Manual* for details.) For simple types this can easily be set
by standard attribute templates.
</dd><dt>

configuration [`"required"` | `"optional"` | `"pseudo"` | `"none"`]
</dt><dd>

Specifies how Simics treats the attribute. The default value is
`"optional"`. A *required* attribute must be initialized to a
value when the object is created, while an *optional* attribute can be
left undefined. In both cases, the value is saved when a checkpoint
is created. For a *pseudo*-attribute, the value is *not* saved
when a checkpoint is created (and it is not required to be initialized upon
object creation). Setting the value to `"none"` suppresses creation of
the attribute. This is seldom useful in attribute objects, but can be used in
related object types like `register` to suppress
checkpointing.
</dd><dt>

persistent [bool]
</dt><dd>

If this parameter is `true`, the attribute will be treated
as persistent, which means that its value will be saved
when using the `save-persistent-state` command.  The default
value is `false`.
</dd><dt>

readable [bool]
</dt><dd>

If false, the attribute cannot be read. This can only be used if
the `configuration` parameter is set
to `"pseudo"`. Normally set by the `write_only_attr` template.

</dd><dt>

writable [bool]
</dt><dd>

If false, the attribute cannot be written. This should normally be
set by instantiating the `read_only_attr` template, and requires
  that the `configuration` parameter
  is `"pseudo"`. Normally set by
  the `read_only_attr` template.

</dd><dt>

internal [bool]
</dt><dd>

If this parameter is `true`, the attribute will be treated
as internal, meaning that it will be excluded from documentation.
The default value is `true` if the `documentation` and `desc` parameters
are undefined, and `false` otherwise.
</dd></dl>
 
## Attribute templates

Four templates are used to create a simple checkpointable attribute with
standard types, storing the attribute value in a member `val`, and
providing default implementations of methods `get` and `set`
accordingly:

<dl><dt>

bool\_attr
</dt><dd>

boolean-valued attribute, `val` has type
`bool`
</dd><dt>

int64\_attr
</dt><dd>

integer-valued attribute, `val` has type
`int64`
</dd><dt>

uint64\_attr
</dt><dd>

integer-valued attribute, `val` has type
`uint64`
</dd><dt>

double\_attr
</dt><dd>

floating-point-valued attribute, `val` has type
`double`
</dd></dl>

In addition, three templates can be used to define a pseudo attribute:

<dl><dt>

pseudo\_attr
</dt><dd>

Pseudo attribute. Will not be
checkpointed. Methods `get` and `set` are abstract.
</dd><dt>

read\_only\_attr
</dt><dd>

Pseudo attribute that cannot be written. Method `get` is
  abstract.
</dd><dt>

write\_only\_attr
</dt><dd>

Pseudo attribute that cannot be read. Method `set` is
  abstract
</dd></dl>

These templates are not compatible with the `bool_attr`, `uint64_attr`,
`int64_attr`, or `float_attr` templates.

## Connect objects

The `connect` template contains the following methods:

<dl><dt>

<small>validate(conf\_object\_t \*obj) -&gt; (bool valid)</small>
</dt><dd>

Called when Simics attempts to assign a new target object. If the return value
is `false`, the attempted connection will fail, and any existing connection
will be kept. The default is to return `true`.

If connecting to a port interface (rather than a port object), then
a session variable `port`, of type `char *`, is set to
the new port name during the `validate` call. This will be
removed in future versions of Simics.

</dd><dt>

<small>set(conf\_object\_t \*obj)</small>
</dt><dd>

Called after validation, to assign a new target object. Can be
overridden to add side-effects before or after the assignment
</dd><dt>

<small>get\_attribute -&gt; (attr\_value\_t value),
set\_attribute(attr\_value\_t value) -&gt; (set\_error\_t err)</small>
</dt><dd>

Internal, not intended to be used directly. Called by Simics for accessing
the attribute value.
</dd></dl>

The `connect` template contains the following parameters:

<dl><dt>

configuration [`"required"` | `"optional"` | `"pseudo"` | `"none"`]
</dt><dd>

Specifies how Simics treats the automatically created
[attribute](#attribute-objects)
corresponding to the connect object. Note that for array objects,
setting this parameter to `"optional"` has the effect that each
instance of the connect can be individually set to a nil value.
</dd><dt>

internal [bool]
</dt><dd>

Specifies whether the [attribute](#attribute-objects) should be internal.
</dd></dl>

## Connect templates

A `connect` object can instantiate the template
`init_as_subobj`. This causes the connect to automatically
set itself to an automatically created object. This can be used to create
a private helper object.

The `init_as_subobj` template accepts one parameter,
`classname`. This defines the class of the automatically created object.

The template also overrides the `configuration` parameter to
`"none"` by default, which makes the connect invisible to the end-user.

The `init_as_subobj` inherits the [`init`](#init) and
[`connect`](#connect-objects) templates.

## Interface objects

The `interface` template contains one parameter,
`required`. Defaults to `true`. If overridden to `false`,
the interface is optional and the parent `connect` object can
connect to an object that does not implement the interface.

The template provides a session variable `val` of type `const void
*`. It points to the Simics interface struct of the currently connected
object. If the interface is optional, then the variable can be compared to NULL
to check whether the currently connected object implements the interface.

## Port objects

The `port` template exposes one parameter, `obj`.
When compiling with Simics API 5 or earlier, evaluates to dev.obj.
When compiling with Simics API 6 or newer, evaluates to the
`conf_object_t *` of the port's port object.

## Subdevice objects

The `subdevice` template exposes one parameter, `obj`, which evaluates to the
`conf_object_t *` of the Simics object that represents the subdevice.

## Implement objects

The `implement` template provides no particular parameters or methods.

## Implement templates

There is a single template for [`implement`](#implement-objects) objects,
namely `bank_io_memory`. The template can be instantiated when implementing the
`io_memory` interface, and redirects the access to a bank, specified by the
`bank` parameter.

Bank objects contain an implementation of `io_memory` that
inherits this template.

## Bank objects

In addition to the `object` template, the `bank` template also inherits the
[`shown_desc`](#shown_desc) template.

The `bank` template contains the following methods:

<dl><dt>

<small>io\_memory\_access(generic\_transaction\_t \*memop, uint64 offset,
void \*aux) -&gt; (bool)</small>
</dt><dd>

Entry point for an access based on `generic_transaction_t`.
      Extracts all needed info from `memop`, calls appropriate
      memop-free methods, updates the `memop` parameter
      accordingly, and returns `true` if the access succeeded. The
      `offset` parameter is the offset of the access relative to
      the bank. The `aux` parameter is NULL by default, and is
      passed on to bank methods.  In order to pass additional information on
      the access down to register and field methods, one can override
      `io_memory_access`, decode needed information from the incoming
      memop, and call `default` with the extracted information in the
      `aux` argument.
</dd><dt>

<small>transaction\_access(transaction\_t \*t, uint64 offset, void \*aux) -&gt;
  (exception\_type\_t)</small>
</dt><dd>

Entry point for an access based on the `transaction` interface.  Extracts all
needed info from `t`, calls appropriate access methods (`read`, `write`, `get`,
`set`), and updates the `t` parameter accordingly. Returns
`Sim_PE_No_Exception` if the access succeeded, and `SIM_PE_IO_Not_Taken`
otherwise. The `offset` parameter is the offset of the access relative to the
bank. The `aux` parameter is NULL by default, and is passed on to bank methods.
In order to pass additional information on the access down to register and
field methods, one can override `transaction_access`, decode needed information
from the incoming transaction, and call `default` with the extracted
information in the `aux` argument. Accesses that bigger than 8 bytes are split
into smaller sized chunks before being completed, the exact details of which
are *undefined*.
</dd><dt>

<small>write(uint64 offset, uint64 value, uint64 enabled\_bytes,
void \*aux) throws</small>
</dt><dd>

A write operation at the given offset. Throwing an exception
makes the access fail, and is typically signaled for writes
outside registers. The default behavior is to forward the
access to registers, as follows:
1. Deduce which registers are hit by the
   access. The `offset` and `size`
   parameters of each register object is used to deduce whether
   the register is covered by the access. A register which is
   only partially covered will be considered hit if the bank
   parameter `partial` is true, and a register
   which does not fully cover the access is considered hit if
   the bank parameter `overlapping` is set.


2. If any portion of the access is not covered by a hit
   register, then the `unmapped_write` method is
   called with a bit pattern showing what parts of the access
   are unmapped. Any exception thrown by unmapped_write is
   propagated, causing the access to fail.


3. The `write_register` method is called in all hit
   registers, starting with the register at the lowest
   offset.

</dd><dt>

<small>unmapped\_write(uint64 offset, uint64 value,
uint64 bits, void \*aux) throws</small>
</dt><dd>

If an access is not fully covered by registers, then this
method is called before the access is performed. Throwing an
exception aborts the entire access. *bits* is a bit
pattern showing which bits are affected; in the lowest 'size'
bits, each 0xff byte represents the position of one unmapped
byte in the access. The *value* parameter contains the
originally written value, including parts that are mapped to
registers. Both *bits* and *value* are
expressed in the host's endianness. The default behavior is to
unconditionally throw an exception.
</dd><dt>

<small>read(uint64 offset, uint64 enabled\_bytes, void \*aux) ->
(uint64 value) throws</small>
</dt><dd>

A read operation at the given offset. The access is decomposed
in the same way as in `write_register`. If there are
unmapped portions of the access, `unmapped_read` is
invoked, possibly aborting the operation. The return value is
composed by the results from calling `read_register` in
hit registers, combined with the result
of `unmapped_read` if the access is not fully
mapped.
</dd><dt>

<small>unmapped\_read(uint64 offset, uint64 value,
uint64 bits, void \*aux) throws</small>
</dt><dd>

Like `unmapped_write` but for reads. The default
      implementation unconditionally throws an exception.
</dd></dl>

The `bank` template contains the following parameters:

<dl><dt>

mappable [boolean]
</dt><dd>

Controls whether a bank is visible as an interface port for the
`io_memory` interface, which makes it mappable in a memory
space.  This defaults to true.
</dd><dt>

overlapping [bool]
</dt><dd>

Specifies whether this bank allows accesses that cover more than
one register. (This translates to one or more, possibly partial,
accesses to adjacent registers.) Defaults to `true`. This parameter
must have the same value among all elements in a bank array
object, i.e., it must not depend on the index of the bank.
</dd><dt>

partial [bool]
</dt><dd>

Specifies whether this bank allows accesses that cover only parts
of a register. A partial read will read the touched register fields
(or the whole register if there are no fields) and extract the bits
covered by the read. A partial write will call the `get`
method on the touched register fields (or the whole register when
there are no fields) and replace the written bits with the written
value and then call the `write` method on the fields (or the
register) with the merged value. Defaults to `true`. This parameter
must have the same value among all elements in a bank array
object, i.e., it must not depend on the index of the bank.
</dd><dt>

register\_size [integer | undefined]
</dt><dd>

Inherited from the `device` object; provides the
default value for the `size` parameter of `register`
objects.
</dd><dt>

byte\_order [string]
</dt><dd>

Specifies the byte order used when accessing registers wider than a
single byte; inherited from `device` objects. Allowed values
are `"little-endian"` and `"big-endian"`.
This parameter must have the same value among all elements in a bank
array object, i.e., it must not depend on the index of the bank.
</dd><dt>

be_bitorder [bool]
</dt><dd>

Controls the preferred bit ordering of registers within this bank.
Whenever the register is presented to the user as a bitfield, bit 0 refers to
the least significant bit if the parameter is `false` (the default), and
to the most significant bit if the parameter is `true`. The parameter is
only a presentation hint and does not affect the model's behaviour. The
parameter is technically unrelated to the top-level `bitorder`
declaration, though in most cases the two should match.
</dd><dt>

use_io_memory [bool]
</dt><dd>

If `true`, this bank is exposed using the legacy `io_memory` interface. In this
case, the `io_memory_access` method can be called and overridden, but
the `transaction_access` method can not.

If `false`, this bank is exposed using the `transaction` interface. In this
case, the `transaction_access` method can be called and overridden, but
the `io_memory_access` method can not.

The default is inherited from `dev.use_io_memory`.</dd><dt>

obj [conf\_object\_t \*]
</dt><dd>

When compiling with Simics API 5 or earlier, evaluates to dev.obj.
When compiling with Simics API 6 or newer, evaluates to the bank's port object.

</dd></dl>

## Register objects

In addition to [`object`](#object), the `register` template inherits the
templates [`get`](#get), [`set`](#set), [`shown_desc`](#shown_desc),
[`read_register`](#read_register), [`write_register`](#write_register), and
[`init_val`](#init_val).

The `register` template contains the following parameters:

<dl><dt>

val [integer]
</dt><dd>

The contents of the register.
Manipulating `val` is a simpler, but less safe
alternative to using `get_val()` and `set_val()` -- unlike `set_val()`,
it is *undefined behavior* to write a value to `val` larger than what the
register can hold.

</dd><dt>

size [integer]
</dt><dd>

The size (width) of the register, in bytes. This parameter
can also be specified using the "<code>size <em>n</em></code>" short-hand
syntax for register objects. The default value is provided by the
`register_size` parameter of the enclosing `bank`
object.
</dd><dt>

bitsize [integer]
</dt><dd>

The size (width) of the register, in bits. This is equivalent to the
value of the `size` parameter multiplied by 8, and cannot be
overridden.
</dd><dt>

offset [integer]
</dt><dd>

The address offset of the register, in bytes relative to the start
address of the bank that contains it. This parameter can also be
specified using the "<code>@ <em>n</em></code>" short-hand syntax for register
objects. There is no default value. If the register inherits the
`unmapped` template, the register is not mapped to an address.
This parameter must have the same value among all elements in a bank
array object, i.e., it must not depend on the index of the bank.
</dd><dt>

fields [list of references]
</dt><dd>

A list of references to all the `field` objects of a register
object.
</dd><dt>

init\_val [integer]
</dt><dd>

The value used by the default implementation of the
`init` method, when the device is instantiated. The value is
also used by the default implementations of hard reset, soft reset and
power-on reset. Defaults to 0.
</dd><dt>

configuration [`"required"` | `"optional"` | `"pseudo"` | `"none"`]
</dt><dd>

Specifies how Simics treats the automatically created [attribute]
(#attribute-objects) corresponding to the register.
</dd><dt>

persistent [bool]
</dt><dd>

Specifies whether the register [attribute](#attribute-objects)
should be persistent.
</dd><dt>

internal [bool]
</dt><dd>

Specifies whether the register [attribute](#attribute-objects)
should be internal, default is `true`.
</dd></dl>

The `register` template provides the following
overridable methods:

<dl><dt>

`read_unmapped_bits(uint64 unmapped_enabled_bits, void *aux) -> (uint64)`
</dt><dd>

`read_unmapped_bits` is used by the default implementation of
`read_register` to read the bits not covered by fields from
a register, possibly with side-effects.

The default implementation of `read_unmapped_bits`
acts similarly to if the unmapped regions of the register were covered by
fields, the `value` of the register is masked by
`unmapped_enabled_bits` and returned.

</dd><dt>

`write_unmapped_bits(uint64 val, uint64 enabled_bits, void *aux)`.
</dt><dd>

The `write_unmapped_bits` method is called from
the default implementation of the `write_register` method
when `enabled_bytes` specifies
bytes not completely covered by field in the register (and the register
has at least one field).
`unmapped_enabled_bits` is defined as in the
`read_unmapped_bits` method. `val` is the
`val` argument passed to `write_register`, masked with
the bits not covered by fields.

Default behaviour of `write_unmapped_bits` is to compare
the `unmapped_enabled_bits` in `value` to those
in the register `val`; if they do not match, a
message of type `spec-viol` is logged for each bitrange
that does not match, but `val` is not modified.

</dd></dl>

## Field objects

In addition to [`object`](#object), the `field` template inherits the templates
[`init_val`](#init_val) and [`shown_desc`](#shown_desc).

The template inherits methods `get`, `set` and
`init`, and the parameter `init_val`

The `field` template contains the following parameters:

<dl><dt>

val [integer]
</dt><dd>

The bitslice of the parent register corresponding to the field.
Manipulating `val` is a simpler alternative to using `get_val()` and
`set_val()`, while being just as safe (unlike with register objects).
Unlike `get_val()` and `set_val()`, `val` is not a member of the `field`
template type, and thus can't be used in certain contexts.
</dd><dt>

reg [reference]
</dt><dd>

Always refers to the containing register object.
</dd><dt>

lsb [integer]
</dt><dd>

Required parameter. The bit number in the containing register of the
field's least significant bit. Represented in little-endian bit order,
regardless of `bitorder` declarations. The preferred way of defining
this parameter is to use the "<code>[<em>highbit</em>:<em>lowbit</em>]</code>"
short-hand syntax for field ranges, whose interpretation *is* dependent
on the `bitorder` declaration of the file. Care must be taken when
referring to this parameter in a big-endian bit numbering system - if possible,
put such code in a separate file that uses little-endian bit order
interpretation.
</dd><dt>

msb [integer]
</dt><dd>

Required parameter. The bit number in the containing register of the
field's most significant bit. Represented in little-endian bit order. See
`lsb` for details.
</dd><dt>

bitsize [integer]
</dt><dd>

The size (width) of the field, in bits. This is automatically set
from the `lsb` and `msb` parameters and cannot be
overridden.
</dd><dt>

init\_val [integer]
</dt><dd>

The value used by the default implementation of the
`init` method, when the device is instantiated. The value is
also used by the default implementations of hard reset, soft reset and
power-on reset. Defaults to 0.
</dd></dl>

## Templates for registers and fields
This section lists templates that are specific for `register` and
`field` objects.

All templates (except `read_register` and
`write_register`) are applicable to both registers and
fields. When writing a template that is applicable to both registers and
fields, one should normally inherit one or more of the `read`,
`write`, `get` and `set` methods.

Some methods have an argument `void *aux`. By default, that argument is
NULL. The value can be overridden to carry arbitrary extra information about
the access; this is done by overriding the `io_memory_access` method
in the parent [bank](#bank-objects).

### get\_val

Provides a single non-overrideable method `get_val() -> (uint64)`. In
a register, it returns the value of the .val member; in a field, it
returns the bits of the parent register's `val` member that are
covered by the field.

`get_val` is very similar to [`get`](#get); the difference is that `get_val`
is unaffected if `get` is overridden. Thus, `get_val` is slightly more
efficient, at the cost of flexibility. It is generally advisable to
use `get`.

### set\_val

Provides a single non-overrideable method
`set_val(uint64)`. In a register, it sets the value of
the .val member; in a field, it sets the bits in the parent
register's `val` member that are covered by the field.

`set_val` is very similar to (`set`)[#set); the difference is
that `set_val` is unaffected if `set` is
overridden. Thus, `set_val` is slightly more efficient, at the
cost of flexibility. It is generally advisable to use `set`.

### get

Extends the [`get_val`](#get_val) template. Provides a single
overrideable method `get() -> (uint64)`, which retrieves the
register's value, without side-effects, used for checkpointing and
inspection. The default is to retrieve the value using the
get_val` method.

In a field, this template must be explicitly instantiated in order for an
override to take effect. Note however that field objects do provide a
callable default implementation of the method.

### set

Extends the [`set_val`](#set_val) template. Provides a single
overrideable method `set(uint64)`, which modifies the register's
value, without triggering other side-effects. Used for checkpointing and
inspection. The default is to set the value using the `set_val`
method.

In a field, this template must be explicitly instantiated in order for an
override to take effect. Note however that field objects do provide a
callable default implementation of the method.

### read\_register

Implemented only by registers, not applicable to fields.

Provides a single abstract method
`read_register(uint64 enabled_bytes, void *aux) -> (uint64)`.

The method reads from a register, possibly with side-effects. The
returned value is represented in the host's native endianness. The
`enabled_bytes` argument defines which bytes of the register is
accessed, as a bitmask; each byte of the returned value has
significance only if the corresponding byte in `enabled_bytes` is
0xff. If the access covers more than one register, then the parts of
`enabled_bytes` that correspond to other registers are still zero.

Register objects provide a default implementation of
`read_register`. The implementation invokes the `read_field` method of
all sub-fields at least partially covered by `enabled_bytes`, in order
from most to least significant bit. Bits not covered by fields are
retrieved by calling the `read_unmapped_bits`, with
`unmapped_enabled_bits` set as the `enabled_bytes` not covered by
fields. If a register implements no fields, then the
`read_unmapped_bits` is not called by default.

If a register inherits the `read_field` or `read` templates, then that
template takes precedence over `read_register`, and the register's
read behaviour is specified by the `read_field` or `read` method.

### write\_register

Implemented only by registers, not applicable to fields.

Provides a single abstract method:
`write_register(uint64 value, uint64 enabled_bytes, void *aux)`.

The method writes to the register, possibly with side-effects. The
`enabled_bytes` parameter is defined as in the `read_register` method.

Register objects provide a default implementation of write_register.
The default behaviour depends on whether the register has fields:

* If the register has no fields, then
  the default behaviour is to set the register's `val` member to the
  new value, using the `set` method.

* If the register has fields, then the default behavior is to
  invoke the `write_fields` method of all sub-fields covered at
  least partially by `enabled_bytes`, in order from
  most to least significant bit. Then `write_unmapped_bits`
  is called with the enabled bits that were not covered by fields.


  If a register inherits the `write` or
  `write_field` template, then that template takes precedence
  over `write_register`, and the register's write behaviour is
  specified by the `write` (or `write_field`) method.

### read\_field

Provides a single abstract method
`read_field(uint64 enabled_bits, void *aux) -> (uint64)`.

The method reads from a field or register, possibly with
side-effects. The returned value is represented in the host's native
endianness. The `enabled_bytes` argument defines which bits of the
register is accessed, as a bitmask; each bit of the returned value has
significance only if the corresponding bit in `enabled_bits` is 1. If
the access covers more than one field, then the parts of
`enabled_bits` that correspond to other fields are still zero.

The `read_field` template is *not* implemented by
fields or registers by default, and must be explicitly instantiated in
order for a method override to have effect.
`read_field` is the interface used for access by registers;
in most cases, it is easier to express read operations using the
`read` template.

Note that instantiating `read_field` on a register means that
register reads behave as if the register consists of one single field; a
read access will ignore any actual field subobjects in the register.

### write\_field

Provides a single abstract method
`write_field(uint64 value, uint64 enabled_bits, void *aux)`.

The method writes to a field or register, possibly with
side-effects. The value is represented in the host's native
endianness. The `enabled_bytes` argument is defined as in the
`read_field` method.

The `write_field` template is *not* implemented by fields or registers
by default, and must be explicitly instantiated in order for a method
override to have effect.  `write_field` is the interface used for
access by registers; in most cases, it is easier to express write
operations using the `write` template.

Note that instantiating `write_field` on a register means that
register writes behave as if the register consists of one single
field; a write access will ignore any actual field subobjects in the
register.  This is often useful in read-only registers, as it allows
reads to propagate to fields, while a violating write can be handled
centrally for the whole register.

### read

Extends templates [`read_field`](#read_field) and [`get_val`](#get_val).

Provides a single overrideable method `read() -> (uint64)`.

The method reads from a field or register, possibly with
side-effects. The returned value is represented in the host's native
endianness. The default behaviour is to retrieve the value using the
`get` method.

The `read` template is *not* implemented by fields or registers by
default, and must be explicitly instantiated in order for a method
override to have effect.

Note that instantiating `read` on a register means that register reads
behave as if the register consists of one single field; a read access
will ignore any actual field subobjects in the register.

### write

Extends templates [`write_field`](#write_field), [`get_val`](#get_val) and
[`set_val`](#set_val).

Provides a single overrideable method `write(uint64)`.

The method writes to a field or register, possibly with
side-effects. The value is represented in the host's native
endianness. The default behaviour is to set the value using the `set`
method.

The `write` template is *not* implemented by fields or registers by
default, and must be explicitly instantiated in order for a method
override to have effect.

Note that instantiating `write` on a register means that register
writes behave as if the register consists of one single field; a write
access will ignore any actual field subobjects in the register.

### init\_val

Extends the [`init`](#init) template.

Provides a parameter `init_val : uint64`, defining the initial value
of the register's `val` member when the object is created. In a field,
defines the initial value of the bits of `val` that are covered by
this field. The parameter is also used by default reset methods.

The template is inherited by both registers and fields. The value is 0
by default. In a register with fields, parameter overrides are
permitted both in the register and in the field objects:


* if the parameter is overridden *only* in the register, then this
  defines the full value of the register.

* if the parameter is overridden both in the register and in some fields,
  then the field overrides take precedence and define the value of the bits
  covered by the field

On a technical level, the default value of `init_val` in a field is
the field's corresponding bits in the parent register's `init_val`;
furthermore, the `init_val` template provides a default
implementation of the `init` method which in register objects sets
bits in `val` not covered by fields, and in field objects sets
corresponding bits of the parent register's `val` member.

## Event objects

The `event` template contains little functionality in itself; it
requires one of six predefined templates `simple_time_event`,
`simple_cycle_event`, `uint64_time_event`,
`uint64_cycle_event`, `custom_time_event`, and
`custom_cycle_event` to be instantiated. These templates expose the
methods `event` and `post`, and possibly others.

In addition to the [`object`](#object) template, the `event` template inherits
the [`shown_desc`](#shown_desc) template.

## Event templates

Each `event` object is required to instantiate one of six
predefined templates: `simple_time_event`, `simple_cycle_event`,
`uint64_time_event`, `uint64_cycle_event`,
`custom_time_event`, and `custom_cycle_event`. These are defined as follows:

* The `simple_*_event` templates are used for events that carry no
  data

* The `uint64_*_event` templates are used for events parameterized
  with a single 64-bit integer value

* The `custom_*_event` templates are used for events that carry more
  complex data; the user must supply explicit serialization and deserialization
  methods.

* In the `*_time_event` templates, time is provided in seconds, as a
  floating-point number


* In the `*_cycle_event` templates, time is provided in cycles, as
  a 64-bit integer


The following methods are defined by all six templates:

<dl><dt>

<small>event()</small>, <small>event(uint64 data)</small>, <small>event(void
\*data)</small>
</dt><dd>

Abstract method, called when the event is triggered. When one of
the `custom_*_event` templates is used, the `event`
method is responsible for deallocating the data.
</dd><dt>

<small>post(time), post(time, uint64 data), post(time, void \*data)</small>
</dt><dd>

Non-overrideable method. Posts the event on the associated queue of the
device. The time argument is specified in cycles or seconds, depending on which
template was instantiated. The event will be triggered after the specified
amount of time has elapsed. The data parameter in a `uint64` or
`custom` event will be passed on to the event() method.
</dd></dl>

The following methods are specific to the `simple_time_event`,
`simple_cycle_event`, `uint64_time_event` and
`uint64_cycle_event` templates:

<dl><dt>

<small>remove(), remove(uint64 data)</small>
</dt><dd>

Removes all events of this type with matching data from
the queue.
</dd><dt>

<small>posted() -&gt; (bool), posted(uint64 value) -&gt; (bool)</small>
</dt><dd>

Returns `true` if the event is in the queue, and
`false` otherwise.
</dd><dt>

<small>next(), next(uint64 data) -&gt; (double or cycles\_t)</small>
</dt><dd>

Returns the time to the next occurrence of the event in the queue
(relative to the current time), in cycles or seconds depending on which
event template was instantiated. If there is no such event in the
queue, a negative value is returned.
</dd></dl>

The following methods are specific to the `custom_time_event`
and `custom_cycle_event` templates:

<dl><dt>

<small>get\_event\_info(void \*data) -&gt; (attr\_value\_t info)</small>
</dt><dd>

This method is called once for each pending event instance when
saving a checkpoint.  It should create an attribute value that can be
used to restore the event.  The `data` parameter is the
user data provided in the `post` call.  The default
implementation always returns a nil value.
</dd><dt>

<small>set\_event\_info(attr\_value\_t info) -&gt; (void \*data)</small>
</dt><dd>

This method is used to restore event information when loading a
checkpoint.  It should use the attribute value to create a user data
pointer, as if it had been provided in a `post`. The default
implementation only checks that the checkpointed information is
nil.
</dd><dt>

<small>destroy(void \*data)</small>
</dt><dd>

This method is called when an event is removed from the event
queue
</dd></dl>
